---
path: '/week-1/1. Why Java?.md'
title: 'Why Java?'
hidden: false
---

<text-box variant='learningObjectives' name='Learning Objectives'>

- Understand why Java is an interesting programming language to learn.

- Remember what you have learned in Introduction to Programming.

</text-box>

## Java compared to other programming languages
Java is a member of the class of object-oriented programming languages, where objects and types offer a convenient abstraction to think about the code that you write. The use of types avoids common mistakes in other languages.
Other popular programming languages such as `Javascript`, `Python`, `R` or `Matlab` are not strongly typed as is Java. It is thus easier to move from Java to one of these than the other way around.
There are, however, more languages that use objects and types, such as `C++` and `C#`. Still, Java is easier to learn because it does not involve difficult memory management.
Learning Java will thus provide you with a good basis for learning many other popular (object-oriented) programming languages.

Another important reason for the popularity of Java is that a Java program can be run on any platform. This means that you can easily share your written program with someone else and that this person can directly run your code without having to make changes or to transform the code to a different format. This is made possible by the `Java Compiler`, which translates the source code that the computer needs to run to code (`bytecode`). The bytecode is then compiled into code your computer can understand, `CPU-specific Assembly`, by the JVM (Java Virtual Machine); that way the CPU on that computer can execute it.

## Introduction to Programming
Earlier, you have taken the course `Introduction to Programming`. You may want to visit the [website of Introduction to Programming](https://feb21011.ese.eur.nl/) to recall things that you have learned last year. Here, you are provided with a very short recap only.

The first program that you have written has probably looked something like this:
```java
public class HelloWorld {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        System.out.println("Hello world!");
    }
}
```
\
In the weeks after, you have learned to use loops to prevent repetitive code and if-statements to account for multiple cases. To store large quantities of values, you have learned to use arrays and lists. Also, you have written methods to structure your code and used objects to create different instances of one construct. 

## This course
In this course, you will become more experienced with some of the most important concepts of Java.
In essence, our aim is that you will be able to write Java programs to solve complex problems that you will encounter during your studies.
