---
path: '/week1/2. Types in Java'
title: 'Types in Java'
hidden: false
---

<text-box variant='learningObjectives' name='Learning Objectives'>
    
- You know what is meant with the concept of a generic type parameter.

- You are familiar with already existing Java classes that make use of generic type parameters.

- You can create classes of your own that make use of generic type parameters.

</text-box>

## Introduction to types
Since we began using lists, we have given data structures the type of the values that we want them to store. For example, a list that stores strings has been defined as `ArrayList<String>`. But why would we bother about types?

First consider the following code:
```java
int student = 36;
int grade = 45;
register(student, grade);
```
Is this correct code? It depends on how the register method is defined. Consider the two following options:
```java
public static void register(int grade, int student) {...}
``` 
or
```java
public static void register(int student, int grade) {...}
```
**The best way to avoid bugs is to make them impossible.**
If we would rewrite this code using types, only one register method signature is valid, such that the compiler will tell if we present the right parameters.
```java
Student student = getStudent(36);
Grade grade = getGrade(12);
register(student, grade);
```
In the above code, we have used the Student and Grade types. Now, `public static void register(Grade grade, Student student)` will not compile, but `public static void register(Student student, Grade grade)` will. This way, a mistake is already found by the compiler before we can even run the code.

The use of types in Java both has advantages and disadvantages, which are listed below.
Advantages
* A powerful type system helps to **prevent bugs**.
* Your programming environment uses types to tell you what you can do with the object.
* Code becomes **easier to read** when your variables have types.
* Types make it easier to write **modular code** since it allows for polymorphism which we discuss later in this course.
* Automated manipulation of your code by means of **refactoring** becomes safer.

Disadvantages
* As types need to be declared, you need **more code** to do the same thing.
* A decent understanding of the **type system** of the language is required.

## Primitive types
In Java, eight primitive types exist, which you already know: `byte`, `short`, `int`, `long`, `float`, `double`, `char` and `boolean`. Primitive types are not considered as objects and they just represent raw values. All other types are non-primitive, such as `String`, `List` and arrays.

Sometimes, it is useful to convert types. In some cases, this can be done automatically, for example:
```java
int number = 233;
double sameNumber = number; //sameNumber holds 233.0 now
```
This type of conversion is called **implicit casting**, because casting is done automatically without us telling explicitly that the compiler should cast the number to the other type.
In other cases, however, this is not possible, such as in this case:
```java
double number = 123.0;
int sameNumber = number; //this will give an error
```
In general, **automatic conversion is only possible if the conversion goes from a more specific to a more general type**. This way, the compiler saves you from _loss of precision_ without realizing.
In some cases we may still want to convert a `double` into an `int` value because we know that it will work out right. 
We can do that by **explicit casting**, which is basically telling the compiler to override the type system, like this:
```java
double number 123.0;
int sameNumber = (int) number; //sameNumber holds 123 now
```

## Non-Primitive Types



## Existing stuff
How on Earth can you implement a class that can contain objects of a given type?
*Generics* relates to how classes that store objects can store objects of a freely chosen type. The choice is based on the generic type parameter in the definition of the classes, which makes it possible to choose the type(s) *at the moment of the object's creation*. Using generics is done in the following manner: after the name of the class, follow it with a chosen number of type parameters. Each of them is  placed between the 'smaller than' and 'greater than' signs, like this: `public class Class<TypeParameter1, TypeParameter2, ...>`. The type parameters are usually defined with a single character.

Let's implement our own generic class `Locker` that can hold one object of any type.

```java
public class Locker<T> {
    private T element;

    public void setValue(T element) {
        this.element = element;
    }

    public T getValue() {
        return element;
    }
}
```


<!-- Määrittely `public class Lokero<T>` kertoo että luokalle `Lokero` tulee antaa konstruktorissa tyyppiparametri. Konstruktorikutsun jälkeen kaikki olion sisäiset muuttujat tulevat olemaan kutsun yhteydessä annettua tyyppiä. Luodaan merkkijonon tallentava lokero. -->

The definition `public class Locker<T>` indicates that the `Locker` class must be given a type parameter in its constructor. After the constructor call is executed, all the variables stored in that object are going to be of the type that was given with the constructor. Let's create a locker for storing strings.


<!-- ```java
Lokero<String> merkkijono = new Lokero<>();
merkkijono.asetaArvo(":)");

System.out.println(merkkijono.haeArvo());
``` -->

```java
Locker<String> string = new Locker<>();
string.setValue(":)");

System.out.println(string.getValue());
```

<sample-output>

:)

</sample-output>


<!-- Yllä olevalla ohjelmalla merkkijono-nimisen `Lokero`-olion **ajonaikainen** toteutus on seuraavanlainen. -->

In the program above, the **runtime** implementation of the `Locker` object named `string` looks like the following.


<!-- ```java
public class Lokero<String> {
    private String alkio;

    public void asetaArvo(String alkio) {
        this.alkio = alkio;
    }

    public String haeArvo() {
        return alkio;
    }
}
``` -->

```java
public class Locker<String> {
    private String element;

    public void setValue(String element) {
        this.element = element;
    }

    public String getValue() {
        return element;
    }
}
```

<!-- Tyyppiparametria vaihtamalla voidaan luoda myös muuntyyppisiä olioita tallentavia `Lokero`-olioita. Esimerkiksi kokonaisluvun saa tallennettua seuraavasti. -->

Changing the type parameter allows for creating lockers that store objects of other types. You could store an integer in the following manner.

```java
Locker<Integer> integer = new Locker<>();
integer.setValue(5);

System.out.println(integer.getValue());
```

<sample-output>

5

</sample-output>


Similarly, here is how to create a locker for storing a `Random` object.


```java
Locker<Random> random = new Locker<>();
random.setValue(new Random());

System.out.println(random.getValue().nextDouble());
```


There is no maximum on the number of type parameters, it's all dependent on the implementation. The programmer could implement the following `Pair` class that is able to store two objects of specified types.


```java
public class Pair<T, K> {
    private T first;
    private K second;

    public void setValues(T first, K second) {
        this.first = first;
        this.second = second;
    }

    public T getFirst() {
        return this.first;
    }

    public K getSecond() {
        return this.second;
    }
}
```

<quiz id="4e28cce5-9043-58be-ac53-5243976494bd"></quiz>


A significant portion of the Java data structures use type parameters, which enables them to handle different types of variables. ArrayList, for instance, receives a single type parameter, while HashMap receives two.

```java
List<String> strings = new ArrayList<>();
Map<String, String> keyValuePairs = new HashMap<>();
```

From here on out when you see the type `ArrayList<String>`, you know that its internal implementation uses a generic type parameter. The same principle holds true for the interface Comparable, for example.

Creating generic interfaces is very similar to creating generic classes. Below you can study the generic interface `List` (our own definition, which is not as extensive as the existing Java [List](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/List.html)).

```java
public interface List<T> {
    void add(T value);
    T get(int index);
    T remove(int index);
}
```

There are two ways for a class to implement a generic interface. One is to decide the type parameter in the definition of the class, and the other is to define the implementing class with a type parameter as well. Below, the class `MovieList` defines the type parameter when it implements List. The MovieList is meant only for handling movies.


```java
public class MovieList implements List<Movie> {
    // object variables

    @Override
    public void add(Movie value) {
        // implementation
    }

    @Override
    public Movie get(int index) {
        // implementation
    }

    @Override
    public Movie remove(int index) {
        // implementation
    }
}
```

The alternative is to use a type parameter in the class defintion, in which case the parameter is passed along to the interface. Now this concrete implementation of the interface remains generic.

```java
public class GeneralList<T> implements List<T> {
    // object variables

    @Override
    public void add(T value) {
        // implementation
    }

    @Override
    public T get(int index) {
        // implementation
    }

    @Override
    public T remove(int index) {
        // implementation
    }
}
```

If you wanted, you could also use the existing ArrayList class to implement the GeneralList. The implementation would look roughly like this.

```java
import java.util.ArrayList;

public class GeneralList<T> implements List<T> {
    ArrayList<T> values;

    public GeneralList() {
        this.values = new ArrayList<>();
    }

    @Override
    public void add(T value) {
        this.values.add(value);
    }

    @Override
    public T get(int index) {
        retun this.values.get(index);
    }

    @Override
    public T remove(int index) {
        T value = this.values.get(index);
        this.values.remove(index);
        return value;
    }
}
```

<programming-exercise name='Hideout' tmcname='part12-Part12_01.Hideout'>

Implement a class called Hideout, which has a single generic type parameter. The object created from the class may only hide one object at a time. The class should provide a parameterless constructor as well as the following three methods:

- `public void putIntoHideout(T toHide)` puts an object with a type in accordance with the type parameter given to the the class into the hideout. In case an object is already in the hideout, it will disappear.

- `public T takeFromHideout()` takes out the object with a type in accordance with the type parameter given to the the class from the hideout. In case there is nothing in the hideout, we return `null`. Calling the method returns the object in the hideout and removes the object from the hideout.

- `public boolean isInHideout()` returns the value `true` if there is an object in the hideout. In case there isn't an object in the hideout, it should return the value `false`.

**There are no tests for the class in the exercise template**. Submit the exercise when the following examples work as intended.


```java
Hideout<String> den = new Hideout<>();
System.out.println(den.isInHideout());
den.putIntoHideout("peekaboo");
System.out.println(den.isInHideout());
System.out.println(den.takeFromHideout());
System.out.println(den.isInHideout());
den.putIntoHideout("toodaloo");
den.putIntoHideout("heelloo");
System.out.println(den.isInHideout());
System.out.println(den.takeFromHideout());
System.out.println(den.isInHideout());
```

<sample-output>

false
true
peekaboo
false
true
heelloo
false

</sample-output>


```java
Hideout<Integer> den = new Hideout<>();
System.out.println(den.isInHideout());
den.putIntoHideout(1);
System.out.println(den.isInHideout());
System.out.println(den.isInHideout());
System.out.println(den.takeFromHideout());
System.out.println(den.isInHideout());
```

<sample-output>

false
true
true
1
false

</sample-output>

</programming-exercise>

<programming-exercise name='Pipe' tmcname='part12-Part12_02.Pipe'>

Implement a class called Pipe, which has a single generic parameter type. The pipe works, such that we can add values into it and values can be taken out. Adding to the pipe happens from one end, and taking out from the other end. In other words, we always remove the value which has been inside the pipe the longest and add to it the newest value. The class should provide a parameterless constructor as well as the following three methods:

- `public void putIntoPipe(T value)` puts an object with a type in accordance with the type parameter given to the the class into the pipe.

- `public T takeFromPipe()` takes out the value, which has been in the pipe the longest. In case there is nothing in the pipe, return `null`. Calling the method returns the value, which has been in the pipe the longest, and removes it from the pipe.

- `public boolean isInPipe()` returns the value `true` if the pipe has values. In case the pipe is empty, it returns the value `false`.

Use ArrayList to implement the internal functionality of the class.

**There are no tests for the class in the exercise template**. Submit the exercise when the following examples work as intended.

```java
Pipe<String> pipe = new Pipe<>();
pipe.putIntoPipe("dibi");
pipe.putIntoPipe("dab");
pipe.putIntoPipe("dab");
pipe.putIntoPipe("daa");
while(pipe.isInPipe()) {
    System.out.println(pipe.takeFromPipe());
}
```

<sample-output>

dibi
dab
dab
daa

</sample-output>

```java
Pipe<Integer> numberPipe = new Pipe<>();
numberPipe.putIntoPipe(1);
numberPipe.putIntoPipe(2);
numberPipe.putIntoPipe(3);

int sum = 0;
while(numberPipe.isInPipe()) {
    sum = sum + numberPipe.takeFromPipe();
}
System.out.println(sum);
System.out.println(numberPipe.takeFromPipe());
```

<sample-output>

6
null

</sample-output>

</programming-exercise>


<quiz id='515dc1a2-e0b9-5f2d-b8b3-cff8ae61b8b1'></quiz>
