---
path: '/week2/2. Errors and Exceptions'
title: 'Errors and exceptions'
hidden: false
---

<text-box variant='learningObjectives' name='Learning Objectives'>
 
 - You know the error classifications and how to solve them.
 
 - You know what exceptions are and how to handle them
 
 - You can throw exceptions
 
 - You know that some exceptions have to be handled and that some exceptions do not have to be handled.

</text-box>

## Errors
When programming, many errors can occur. You experienced some of them already last year when you took the course Introduction to Programming. We can classify errors in three rubrics, namely compile time errors, runtime errors and logic errors. In the course Introduction to Programming, we focussed on prevention of logic errors by commenting our code. In this section, we emphasize more on the compile time and runtime errors, which also have been shortly mentioned before. 

The compiler finds some of these errors before we even run our code. These errors are called compile times errors. Several examples of compile time errors are syntax errors, type errors, and structural errors.

Examples of **syntax errors**:
- `int number = 3 +* 7; //The two operators +* can't be executed like this.`
- `public int calculate(int a, int b { //The closing parenthesis misses: )`

Examples of **type errors**:
- `int number = "word"; //The type should be String or the value should be a number.`
- `Student student = "John"; //A constructor should be called; this is a String.`

Example of a **Structural error**:
``` java
public int specialProduct(int a, int b) {
   int c = a*a + b*b;
} // There is no return statement.
```

To solve these compile errors, you should just fix your code. Mostly, the Java Virtual Machine provides you with good suggestions.

The errors that are found during or after running your code are called run time errors. Sometimes, these errors are discovered when the user enters invalid, irrelevant or special-case data.

Example of a **Runtime error**:
```java
public static void main(String args[]) {
   double number1 = 233;
   double number2 = 0;
   double answer = number1/number2; // We divide by 0; will cause runtime error
}
```

Other examples are:
- The ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException: you request an item from a negative index or an index greater or equal the size of the array.
- The NullPointerException: you call a method on an object that references to null.
- The OutOfMemoryError: you overquestion the memory space of your computer. Most likely, this is due to an infinite loop. For instance a `while(true)` without any stopping criterion inside.
- The StackOverflowError: you overquestion the stack of your computer. This is the memory space which keeps track of where you are in your program. This happens for instance if you let a method call itself infinitely often.
- The InputMismatchException: you expect another type of variable than the user provides you with. For example, the user enters a string and you call `scanner.nextDouble();`.
- The NumberFormatException: you try to format a number, for instance from string to int, but the string does not contain a (integer) number.

To solve these runtime errors, run, test, and improve your code. Also, you should _handle exceptions_. The topic of exception-handling is covered in the next paragraph.

The third and last type of error is the most challenging and annoying one: the logical error. Your computer can not recognize a locic error for you, since the program compiles and executes as it should. In such a case, the error is that it does the wrong thing or returns an incorrect result (or even no output at all).

Example of a **Logical error**:
```java
public double otherAngle(double angle1, double angle2) {
   return 360 - angle1 - angle2; // The angles of a triangle add up to 180, not 360.
}
```

To solve these logical errors, test, reason and prove your code is correct. By going through all the steps of your code again, you can find your own mistakes.

## Exceptions
When program execution ends with an error, an exception is thrown. For example, a program might call a method with a *null* reference and throw a `NullPointerException`, or the program might try to refer to an element outside an array and result in an `IndexOutOfBoundsException`, and so on.
Some exceptions we have to always prepare for, such as errors when reading from a file or errors related to problems with a network connection. On the other hand, we do not have to prepare for runtime exceptions, such as the NullPointerException, beforehand. Java will always let you know if your code has a statement or an expression which can throw an error you have to prepare for.
Java has special features incorporated into the language that can pass control to a handler, from the point a runtime error was detected.

## Handling exceptions
You can raise an exception with the `throw` keyword. It is good to indicate that something can go wrong in your method by defining throws in the method signature.
Here is an example:
```java
public void withdrawMoney(int amount) throws IllegalArgumentException {
   if (amount > balance) {
      throw new IllegalArgumentException("Balance too low");
   }
   balance -= amount;
}
```

In the example above, you don't need an 'else' because the exception will stop the method like a return statement does, in case the if-statement is met.

### Try - catch
We use the `try {} catch (Exception e) {}` block structure to handle exceptions. The keyword `try` starts a block containing the code which *might* throw an exception. The block starting with the keyword `catch` defines what happens if an exception is thrown in the `try` block. We use the keyword `catch`, because causing an exception is referred to as `throw`ing an exception. The keyword `catch` is followed by the type of the exception handled by that block, for example:

```java
boolean ask = true;
Scanner scan = new Scanner(System.in);
while(ask) {
   try {
      System.out.println("Please enter the amount to withdraw.");
      String line = s.nextLine();
      int amount = Integer.parseInt(line);
      withdrawMoney(amount);
      ask = false;
   }
   catch (NumberFormatException e) {
      System.out.println("Input was not a valid number. Please try again.");
   }
   catch (IllegalArgumentException e) {
      System.out.println("Amount exceeds balance of " + balance + ". Please try again.");
   }
}
System.out.println("Balance is now: " + balance);
```

Possible output could be:

<sample-output>

_Please enter the amount to withdraw._

**Twenty**

_Input was not a valid number. Please try again._

**80**

_Amount exceeds balance of 50. Please try again._

**20**

_Balance is now: 30_
 
</sample-output>

You can also choose to catch all exceptions at once with the general statement `catch (Exception e)`. Here is an example in which we look at the situation of parsing strings to integers.
The method throws a `NumberFormatException` if the string it has been given cannot be parsed into an integer.

```java
Scanner reader = new Scanner(System.in);

System.out.print("Give a number: ");
int readNumber = -1;

try {
    readNumber = Integer.parseInt(reader.nextLine());
    System.out.println("Good job!");
} catch (Exception e) {
    System.out.println("User input was not a number.");
}
```

<sample-output>

Give a number: **5**
 
Good job!

</sample-output>

<sample-output>

Give a number: **no!**
 
User input was not a number.

</sample-output>

The code in the `catch` block is executed immediately if the code in the `try` block throws an exception. This can be seen from the above example, because the print statement below the line calling the `Integer.parseInt` method in the `try` block was executed if and only if no exception was thrown. The user input, in this case the string `no!`, is given to the `Integer.parseInt` method as a parameter. The method throws an error if the string cannot be parsed into an integer. Note, that the code within the `catch` block is executed *only* if an exception is thrown.

### Try - finally
Another language construct that we can use with `try`, is the `finally` clause. The `finally` block is always executed as soon as the try block is exited, no matter the reason; whether the end was just reached, an exception was raised or even when a value was returned. 
Here is an example:
```java
String s = "hello over there.";
try {
   if (s.contains("hello")) {
      return true;
   }
}
finally {
   System.out.println("This will always be printed.");
}
```

### Try - with resources
There is separate exception handling for reading operating system resources such as files. Certain resources, such as files and network connections, need to be closed when we are finished with them. Traditionally, the `finally` clause was very useful for this, but since Java 7 we can use `Try - with resources` by declaring resources that need to be closed immediately after try. Simply put, to be auto-closed, a resource has to be both declared and initialized inside the try. With so called try-with-resources exception handling, the resource to be opened is added to a non-compulsory part of the try block declaration in brackets. Here is an example:
```java
ArrayList<String> lines =  new ArrayList<>();

public void readFile(File f) throws FileNotFoundException {
   try (Scanner scan = new Scanner(f)) {
     while (scan.hasNext()) {
         lines.add(scan.nextLine());
     }
   }
   catch (Exception e) {
      System.out.println("Error: " + e.getMessage());
   }
}
```

In the above example, the recourse is right behind the try statement. Now the resource is automatically closed when block exits. Now references to files can "disappear", because we do not need them anymore. If the resources are not closed, the operating system sees them as being in use until the program is closed.
Also, no `catch` is required, since the `FileNotFoundException` is thrown by the method. However, you can still add a catch block like is done here, to get information if an exception was thrown anyways.

### Shifting the responsibility
Methods and constructors can throw exceptions. There are roughly two categories of exceptions. 
The first category is types of exceptions that **may** be caught, such as the `IllegalArgumentException`, the `IllegalStateException`, and the `NumberFormatException`. 
Other types of exceptions **must** be caught or declared in the method header using `throws`. These are called **checked exceptions**, such as the `IOException` and the `FileNotFoundException`.
Some problems are so severe that they will stop your program if they occur. These are called `Error` instead of `Exception`, such as the `OutOfMemoryError` and `StackOverflowError`.

We can handle exceptions by wrapping the code into a `try-catch` block or *throwing them out of the method*.

Parsing a number can throw an exception -- for example, the input might not be numeric at all or the variable type is not right.
This kind of exception may be handled.
We handle the exception by wrapping the code into a `try-catch` block.
In this example, we do not really care about the exception, but we do print a message to the user about it.

```java
public int readNumber(){
    try {
        System.out.println("Please enter the amount to withdraw");
        String line = s.nextLine();
        int amount = Integer.parseInt(line);
    } catch (Exception e) {
        System.out.println("Error: " + e.getMessage());
    }
    return amount;
}
```

A programmer can also leave the exception unhandled and shift the responsibility for handling it to whomever calls the method.
We can shift the responsibility of handling an exception forward by throwing the exception out of a method, and adding notice of this to the declaration of the method.
Notice on throwing an exception forward `throws *ExceptionType*` is added before the opening bracket of a method.

```java
public int readNumber() throws NumberFormatException {
    System.out.println("Please enter the amount to withdraw");
    String line = s.nextLine();
    int amount = Integer.parseInt(line);
    return amount;
}
```

Now the method calling the `readNumber` method has to either handle the exception in a `try-catch` block or shift the responsibility yet forward.
Sometimes the responsibility of handling exceptions is avoided until the end, and even the `main` method can throw an exception to the caller:

```java
public class MainProgram {
   public static void main(String[] args) throws Exception {
       // ...
   }
}
```

Now the exception is thrown to the program executor, or the Java virtual machine. It stops the program execution when an error causing an exception to be thrown occurs.

### Throwing exceptions
The `throw` command throws an exception.
For example a `NumberFormatException` can be done with command `throw new NumberFormatException()`.
The following code always throws an exception.

```java
public class Program {

    public static void main(String[] args) throws Exception {
        throw new NumberFormatException(); // Program throws an exception
    }
}
```

One exception that the user does not have to prepare for is `IllegalArgumentException`.
The `IllegalArgumentException` tells the user that the values given to a method or a constructor as parameters are *wrong*.
It can be used when we want to ensure certain parameter values.

Lets create class `Grade`. It gets a integer representing a grade as a constructor parameter.

```java
public class Grade {
    private int grade;

    public Grade(int grade) {
        this.grade = grade;
    }

    public int getGrade() {
        return this.grade;
    }
}
```

We want that the grade fills certain criteria. The grade has to be an integer between 0 and 5. If it is something else, we want to *throw an exception*.
Let's add a conditional statement to the constructor, which checks if the grade fills the criteria.
If it does not, we throw the `IllegalArgumentException` with `throw new IllegalArgumentException("Grade must be between 0 and 5.");`.

```java
public class Grade {
    private int grade;

    public Grade(int grade) {
        if (grade < 0 || grade > 5) {
            throw new IllegalArgumentException("Grade must be between 0 and 5.");
        }

        this.grade = grade;
    }

    public int getGrade() {
        return this.grade;
    }
}
```

```java
Grade grade = new Grade(3);
System.out.println(grade.getGrade());

Grade illegalGrade = new Grade(22);
// exception happens, execution will not continue from here
```

<sample-output>

3
 
Exception in thread "..." java.lang.IllegalArgumentException: Grade must be between 0 and 5.

</sample-output>

If an exception is a runtime exception, e.g. IllegalArgumentException, we do not have to warn about throwing it on the method declaration.

<programming-exercise name='Validating parameters (2 parts)' tmcname='part11-Part11_11.ValidatingParameters'>

Let's practice a little parameter validation with the `IllegalArgumentException` exception. There are two classes included with the exercise base: `Person` and `Calculator`. Modify the classes in the following manner:

<h2>Validating a person</h2>

The constructor of the class `Person` should ensure that the name given as the parameter is not null, empty, or over 40 characters in length. The age should between 0 and 120. If some of these conditions are not met, the constructor should throw an `IllegalArgumentException`.

<h2>Validating the calculator</h2>

The methods of the `Calculator` class should be as follows: The method `factorial` should only work if the parameter is a non-negative number (0 or greater). The method `binomialCoefficient` should only work when the parameters are non-negative and the subset size does not exceed the set size. If these methods receive invalid parameters when they are called, they should throw an `IllegalArgumentException`

</programming-exercise>

### Design principles
Exceptions are meant to deal with **exceptional** situations. They should thus not be used for regular control flow! Throwing and handling exceptions is not optimized, as language designers assume they don't occur very often.

You should **throw early, catch late**. It means that you should check the input of a method before you start doing computations. If the input is not okay, throw an exception.
If an exception can occur within a method that is not able to provide a good solution to the problem, the exception should be thrown to the caller.

Last but not least: _never use **return** in a finally block!_ It may cause weird behavior, such as canceling a thrown exception. The best alternative is to use try-with-recourses.

### Details of the exception
A `catch` block defines which exception to prepare for with `catch (Exception e)`.
The details of the exception are saved to the `e` variable.

```java
try {
    // program code which might throw an exception
} catch (Exception e) {
    // details of the exception are stored in the variable e
}
```

The `Exception` class has some useful methods. For example `printStackTrace()` prints the *stack trace*, which shows how we ended up with an exception.
Below is a stack trace printed by the `printStackTrace()` method.

<sample-output>

Exception in thread "main" java.lang.NullPointerException
  at package.Class.print(Class.java:43)
  at package.Class.main(Class.java:29)

</sample-output>

We read a stack trace from the bottom up. At the bottom is the first call, so the execution of the program has begun from the `main()` method of the `Class` class.
Line 29 of the main method of the `Class` class calls the `print()` method.
Line 43 of the `print` method has thrown a `NullPointerException` exception.
The details of an exception are very useful when trying to pinpoint where an error happens.

<programming-exercise name='Sensors and temperature (4 parts)' tmcname='part11-Part11_12.SensorsAndTemperature'>

All the classes should be placed inside the `application` package.

We have the following interface at our disposal:

```java
public interface Sensor {
    boolean isOn();    // returns true if the sensor is on
    void setOn();      // sets the sensor on
    void setOff();     // sets the sensor off
    int read();        // returns the value of the sensor if it's on
                       // if the sensor is not on, throw an IllegalStateException
}
```

<h2>Standard sensor</h2>

Create a class called `StandardSensor` that implements the interface `Sensor`.

A standard sensor is always on. Calling the methods setOn and setOff have no effect. The StandardSensor must have a constructor that takes one integer parameter. The method call `read` returns the number that was given to the constructor.

An example:

```java
public static void main(String[] args) {
    StandardSensor ten = new StandardSensor(10);
    StandardSensor minusFive = new StandardSensor(-5);

    System.out.println(ten.read());
    System.out.println(minusFive.read());

    System.out.println(ten.isOn());
    ten.setOff();
    System.out.println(ten.isOn());
}
```

<sample-output>

10
-5
true
true

</sample-output>

<h2>TemperatureSensor</h2>

Create a class `TemperatureSensor` that implements the `Sensor` interface.

At first a temperature sensor is off. When the method `read` is called and the sensor is on, the sensor randomly chooses an integer in the range -30...30 and returns it. If the sensor is off, the method `read` throws an `IllegalStateException`.

Use the ready-made Java class <a href="https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/Random.html" target="_blank" rel="noopener">Random</a> to choose the random number. You'll get an integer in the range 0...60 by calling `new Random().nextInt(61);` -- to get a random integer in the range -30...30 you'll have to subtract a suitable number from the random number in the range 0...60.

<br/>

<h2>Average sensor</h2>

Create a class called `AverageSensor` that implements the interface `Sensor`.

An average sensor includes multiple sensors. In addition to the methods defined in the `Sensor` interface, the AverageSensor has the method `public void addSensor(Sensor toAdd)` that can be used to add a new sensor for the average sensor to control.

An AverageSensor is on when *all* its sensors are on. When `setOn` is called, all the sensors must be set on. When `setOff` is called, at least one of the sensors must be set off. It's also acceptable to set off all the sensors.

The method `read` of AverageSensor returns the average of the `read` methods of its sensors (since the return value is `int`, the number is rounded down, as is the case with integer division). If this method is called while the AverageSensor is off, or if no sensors have been added to it, the method should throw an `IllegalStateException`.

Here follows an example program that uses the sensors (NB: the constructors of both TemperatureSensor and AverageSensor are non-parameterized):

```java
public static void main(String[] args) {
    Sensor kumpula = new TemperatureSensor();
    kumpula.setOn();
    System.out.println("temperature in Kumpula " + kumpula.read() + " degrees Celsius");

    Sensor kaisaniemi = new TemperatureSensor();
    Sensor helsinkiVantaaAirport = new TemperatureSensor();

    AverageSensor helsinkiRegion = new AverageSensor();
    helsinkiRegion.addSensor(kumpula);
    helsinkiRegion.addSensor(kaisaniemi);
    helsinkiRegion.addSensor(helsinkiVantaaAirport);

    helsinkiRegion.setOn();
    System.out.println("temperature in Helsinki region " + helsinkiRegion.read() + " degrees Celsius");
}
```
 
The print statements below depend on which temperatures are randomly returned:

<sample-output>

temperature in Kumpula 11 degrees Celsius
temperature in Helsinki region 8 degrees Celsius

</sample-output>

<h2>All readings</h2>

Add to the class AverageSensor the method `public List<Integer> readings()`. The method should return the results of all the executed readings that the average sensor has done as a list. Here is an example:

```java
public static void main(String[] args) {
    Sensor kumpula = new TemperatureSensor();
    Sensor kaisaniemi = new TemperatureSensor();
    Sensor helsinkiVantaaAirport = new TemperatureSensor();

    AverageSensor helsinkiRegion = new AverageSensor();
    helsinkiRegion.addSensor(kumpula);
    helsinkiRegion.addSensor(kaisaniemi);
    helsinkiRegion.addSensor(helsinkiVantaaAirport);

    helsinkiRegion.setOn();
    System.out.println("temperature in Helsinki region " + helsinkiRegion.read() + " degrees Celsius");
    System.out.println("temperature in Helsinki region " + helsinkiRegion.read() + " degrees Celsius");
    System.out.println("temperature in Helsinki region " + helsinkiRegion.read() + " degrees Celsius");

    System.out.println("readings: " + helsinkiRegion.readings());
}
```

Again, the exact print statements depend on the randomized readings:

<sample-output>

temperature in Helsinki region -10 degrees Celsius
temperature in Helsinki region -4 degrees Celsius
temperature in Helsinki region 5 degrees Celsius

readings: [-10, -4, 5]

</sample-output>

</programming-exercise>
